posts: add Rust for VGEM blogpost (#3)
mairacanal/mairacanal.github.io: _posts/2023-02-27-Rust-for-VGEM.md

---
title: "Rust for VGEM"
date: 2023-02-27
author: Maíra Canal
layout: post
permalink: /rust-for-vgem/
categories: Genel
tags: [igalia, graphics]
---

In the last blog post, I pointed out that I didn't know exactly what it would be
my next steps for the near future. Gladly, I had the amazing opportunity to
start a new [Igalia Coding
Experience](https://www.igalia.com/coding-experience/) with a new project.

This time [Melissa Wen](https://melissawen.github.io/) pitched me with the idea
to play around with Rust for Linux in order to rewrite the VGEM driver in Rust.
The Rust for Linux project is growing fast with new bindings and abstractions
being introduced in the downstream RfL kernel. Also, some basic functionalities
were introduced in Linux 6.1. Therefore, it seems like a great timing to start

> exploring Rust in the DRM!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exploring Rust in the DRM subsystem!
```

# Why Rust?
---
As mentioned by the Rust website, using Rust means **Performance**,
**Reliability**, and **Productivity**. Rust is a blazingly fast and

> memory-efficient language with its powerful **ownership model**. No more looking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
memory-efficient language with its powerful **ownership model**. No more looking for
```

> use-after-free and memory leaks, Rust guarantee memory-safety and thread-safety,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use-after-free and memory leaks, as Rust guarantee memory-safety and thread-safety,
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use-after-free and memory leaks, as Rust guarantees memory safety and thread safety,
```

eliminating a handful of bugs at compile-time.

Moreover, Rust provides a new way of programming. The language provides

> beautiful memory features such as traits, enums, and error handling, that can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
beautiful features such as traits, enums, and error handling, that can
```
these features are not just about memory :)

> makes us feel empowered by the language. We can use a lot of concepts from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make us feel empowered by the language. We can use a lot of concepts from
```

> functional programming and mixed it with concepts from OOP, for example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functional programming and mix it with concepts from OOP, for example.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functional programming and mix them with concepts from OOP, for example.
```

Although I'm an absolute beginner in Rust, I can see the major advantages of the

> Rust programming language. From the start, it was a bit though to enjoy the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rust programming language. From the start, it was a bit tough to enjoy the
```

language, as I was fighting with the compiler most of the time. But now that I
have a more firm foundation on Rust, it is possible to appreciate the beauty in
Rust and I don't see myself starting a new project in C++ for a long while.

Bringing Rust to the Linux Kernel is a ambitious idea, but it can lead to a

> great change. We can think about a world where no developers are looking for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bringing Rust to the Linux Kernel is a ambitious idea, but it can lead to
great changes. We can think about a world where no developers are looking for
```

> memory leaks and use-after-free due to the safety that Rust can provide us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
memory leaks and use-after-free bugs due to the safety that Rust can provide us.
```

# Rust on DRM
---

> Now, what about Rust for DRM? I mean, I'm not the first to think about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, what about Rust for DRM? I mean, I'm not the first one to think about it.
```

means that the IOCTLs are working properly. And, after some debugging and rework
in the IOCTLs, I managed to get most of the tests to pass!

```
[root@fedora igt-gpu-tools]# ./build/tests/dmabuf_sync_file
IGT-Version: 1.27-gaa16e812 (x86_64) (Linux: 6.2.0-rc3-asahi-02441-g6c8eda039cfb-dirty x86_64)
Starting subtest: export-basic
Subtest export-basic: SUCCESS (0.000s)
Starting subtest: export-before-signal
Subtest export-before-signal: SUCCESS (0.000s)
Starting subtest: export-multiwait
Subtest export-multiwait: SUCCESS (0.000s)
Starting subtest: export-wait-after-attach
Subtest export-wait-after-attach: SUCCESS (0.000s)
```

You can check out the current progress of this project on this
[branch](https://github.com/mairacanal/linux/tree/vgem/wip-dma).

# Next Steps
---
Although most of the IGT tests are now passing, two tests aren't working yet:
`vgem_slow`, as I haven't introduced the timeout yet, and `vgem_basic@unload`,
as I still need to debug why the `Drop` trait from `drm::drv::Registration` is
not being called.

After bypassing those two problems, I still need to rework some of my code, as,
for example, I'm using a dummy IOCTL as IOCTL number 0x00, as the current macro

> `kernel::declare_drm_ioctl` doesn't support any drivers that the IOCTLs doesn't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`kernel::declare_drm_ioctl` doesn't support any driver for which the IOCTL doesn't
```
